Hello and welcome back to Pronunciation with
Emma or welcome if you're brand new to my channel
today's video is going to be very different
because you're going to learn about English
grammar more specifically you're going to learn
how to use all the tenses in English from Level
A1 to B2 to talk about the past present and
future correctly in English I will be using
the Cambridge English grammar in use ebook by
Raymond Murphy to teach you all all the tenses
today this is the world's bestselling grammar
book and is perfect if you're self-studying
and you want to learn and improve your English
grammar with the new interactive ebook version
of English grammar in use you can complete the
activities check your answers instantly make
notes and highlight important information and
listen to recordings so you can improve your
listening and pronunciation at the same time
which is why I love this new ebook version
you can also take it with you on the go so you
can practice at any time on your device just for
watching this lesson today I want to give you a
special gift you can get 25% off the Cambridge
English grammar in use ebook when you use the code
GIUSAVE25 GIUSAVE25 to get your own copy of the
ebook just click the link in the description and
remember to use the code GIUSAVE25 to get your
25% off once you have purchased your ebook you can
start using it straight away no waiting around for
deliveries now let's start with today's English
grammar lesson to help you practice and improve
your English grammar even faster I have created a
pdf version of today's lesson notes and activities
for you to download completely for free the free
pdf contain all of today's lesson notes summarised
for you all of the activities as well as some
additional pronunciation tips because of course
it's important to focus on your pronunciation too
and I am pronunciation with Emma so to download
your free pdf just click the link Down Below in
the description so today you're going to learn 10
different tenses and ways to talk about the past
present and future more accurately in English you
can use the timestamps down at the bottom of the
video or in the description to choose the tense
that you want to focus on or you can just watch
the whole lesson at the end of every unit there
is a little test for you to practice and see how
much you've learned are you ready let's go let's
start with the present continuous take a look
at this example here Sarah is in her car she
is on her way to work she is driving to work this
means that Sarah is driving right now at the time
of speaking the action has not finished to create
the present continuous start with the subject for
example I you she he it and so on then you add
the conjugated form of to be for example I am you
are he she it is ETC we call this type of verb an
auxiliary verb this is because the verb be like I
am you are Etc in this case in this specific tense
it's not actually the action it's not actually the
verb this verb B is going to help us construct
the tense so now we have the subject we have the
auxiliary verb be after that we add the ing form
of the verb this particular ing form is called the
gerund in English but to keep things very simple
and to not use too many technical terms I'm just
going to call it the ing form so to create the ing
form or the gerund form of the verb you just take
the normal verb and you add ing to the end of
it so work becomes working do becomes doing and
drive becomes driving if the verb ends with an e
for example like in drive as we saw in our first
sentence you remove the E and then you add in so
it becomes driving the same happens with write
you remove the E and then you add in to create
writing to sound more natural in English you can
combine the subject and our auxiliary verb to be
together so I am becomes I'm you are becomes your
she is becomes she's Etc using contractions will
make you sound much more natural so get used to
using them and hearing them because you will hear
them a lot so now you know how to use the present
continuous to talk about an action happening
right now at the time of speaking but you can
also use the present continuous to talk about an
action that's in progress and hasn't finished yet
let me give you an example I'm reading a really
good book right now I'm not reading the book now
in this moment it's not in my hand off camera
it's not happening now but I started reading
the book and the action of reading that book
continues I haven't finished reading the book
I am still continuing to read the book so we can
use the present continuous to talk about actions
that haven't finished yet we are still in the
middle of that action I'm still in the middle
of reading my book to make the negative form all
you need to do is add not after the auxiliary verb
be so I am not reading a book or I'm not reading
a book Let's now do some activities to help you
practice the present continuous take a look at
these pictures and tell me what's happening use
the verb above the picture to help you construct
the sentence pause the video if you feel you need
a bit more time so for number one you can say
she is taking a picture she's taking a picture
or you can use the contracted form she's taking
a picture for the second one you can say they
are crossing the road they are crossing the road
or the contracted form they're crossing the road
now we're going to look at the present simple look
at this example Alex works as a nurse he drives to
work every day we use the present simple tense to
talk about things in general like facts or we use
it to talk about routines and habits Alex works
as a nurse is a fact it's something constant it's
something general it's true and he drives to work
every day is a habit it's a routine to make the
present simple tense for regular verbs all
you need to do is take the infinitive form
of the word for example to work and you remove
to so you're left with What's called the bare
infinitive once you're left with that all you
need to do is just conjugate it for he she it
this is very simple a lot of the time you just add
an S so you have I work you work he she it works
they work we work and that's it you only conjugate
he she it in English when you're talking about the
present simple let's try another one for example
to drive what do we do we remove to so we're left
with drive then we only conjugate the third
person so he she it and what do we add to the
end an S so we say I drive you drive he she it
drives we drive they drive remember he she it is
the only one that changes to make the negative
form of the present simple all you need to do
is add do not or does not for he she it and you
add that after the subject so I do not drive she
does not drive you only need to conjugate do in
this case so you don't need to say she does not
drives that's a really common mistake you only
conjugate does he does not drive she does not
drive again if you want to sound more natural
then make sure you use the contracted form I
don't drive she doesn't drive so let's practice
the present simple with some activities complete
these sentences using the following verbs
and pause the video if you feel you need more
time number one I speak English and French number
two John and Jane do not go to the same school or
John and Jane don't go to the same school number
three the shop closes at 6:00 p.m. so it's the
only one that changes the shop Clos closes because
it's a singular here we're treating it like it so
he she it closes the shop closes so remember
to add that s now let's compare the present
continuous and the present simple so you use the
present continuous to talk about things that are
happening at or around the time of speaking or
when an action started in the past and it isn't
complete yet you use the present simple to talk
about more General things like facts or to talk
about things that happen repeatedly like habits
or routines here are some examples to show you the
difference I'm filming a video right now which
is true I'm in this moment and telling you I'm
filming a video right now I'm talking about an
action as I am doing that action but I film a
video video every week is a routine it's something
repeated here are now some exercises to help you
practice the difference between present simple
and present continuous look at the underlined
verb and decide whether it's correct or not if
it's not correct then I'd like you to correct
it feel free to pause the video if you need
more time number one John is looking for a
job this sentence is correct because
the action is not complete yet it's
still happening he is still looking for a
job number two water is boiling at 100°C
this is incorrect and the reason for
this is because it's a fact so water
boils at 100° C and number three the last
one she is walking her dog every every
day this one is not correct because it's a
routine every day we need to use the present
simple she walks her dog every day now let's move
on to some past tenses and ways that you can talk
about past actions take a look at this sentence
I went to a party last week this is an example
of the past simple we use the past simple to talk
about actions which started and finished in the
past as we know that the party happened last
week it's definitely finished the party is not
continuing now it finished last week so we know
to use the past simple to create the past simple
tense in English with regular verbs all you need
to do is add Eed D to the end of the verb so the
verb work becomes worked want becomes wanted and
so on if the verb ends with a Y you change the
Y into an i and then add Eed for example study
becomes studied there are three possible ways
to pronounce the Ed endings in English and if
you'd like a full lesson to know when and how
to pronounce those Ed endings then check out my
video on that I will leave it linked Down Below
in the description I have also included a little
summary in the downloadable PDF lesson notes so
you can practice your pronunciation there
as well keep in mind that there are lots of
irregular verbs in English which don't follow
this Ed ending rule for example write doesn't
become writed it becomes wrote C is not seed
it's saw go is not goed it's went and run is
not runed or runed which I hear a lot it's ran
so keep an eye out for irregular verbs in English
because there are many when you want to use the
negative form all you need to do is add did not
after the subject so yesterday I went to the
park in the negative form it becomes yesterday
I did not go to the park it's a really really
common mistake for Learners to say yesterday I
did not went you don't need to conjugate that
main verb all you need to do is say did and
that's it so yesterday I did not go to the park
let's now practice the past simple with some
exercises let's read what Laura is saying here
as you'll see it's all in the present tense but
listen carefully because I'm going to ask you some
questions after we finished reading I usually get
up at 7:00 and have a big breakfast I walk to
work which takes me about half an hour I start
work at 8:45 I never have lunch I finish work at
5:00 I'm always tired when I get home I usually
cook a meal in the evening I don't usually go out
I go to bed at about 11:00 and I always sleep well
now let's mention we're talking about Laura's day
but in the past number one what time did Laura get
up Laura got up at 7:00 got is the past simple
of get it is irregular number two did Laura eat
lunch no Laura did not eat lunch or she
didn't eat lunch remember we don't say
did not ate we don't need to put the main
verb into the past as well because did is
already telling us that it happened in the
past number three what time did Laura go to
bed Laura went to bed at 11:00 went is the
past tense of go go is an irregular verb in
English now let's look at the past continuous
the structure for the past continuous is really
similar to the present continuous so if you
remember the present continuous is the subject
then the verb to be which is our auxiliary verb
our helping verb and then the ing form of the
verb the main verb for example I am doing all we
need to do for the past continuous is just change
the verb to be into the past so I was doing I
am doing I was doing that's very simple to do
so remember that the verb to be is irregular so I
am doing you are doing he she it is doing becomes
I was doing you were doing he she it was doing
here's another example for you this time last
year he was living in London here we use the past
continuous he was living in London because the
action happened for a long period of time in
the past here's another example at 9:00 a.m.
I started playing tennis at 1100 a.m. I finished
playing tennis at 10:00 a.m. I was playing tennis
here I'm using the past continuous with I was
playing tennis because I was in the middle of
doing a longer action in the past you can also
use the past simple and the past continuous
together to talk about how a longer action
was interrupted by another action for example
I was taking a shower when you called me so
I was in the middle of doing a longer action
when you interrupted that action now let's
practice with some activities take a look
at this task here I'd like you to fill in
the gaps pause the video if you need more
time I saw Sarah in town yesterday but she didn't
see me she was looking in the other direction
so with the first sentence I saw Sarah it happened
in the past it was an action that finished in the
past but she didn't see me again this is one
action that happened in the past and finished
in the past but we use she was looking in the
other direction because this action happened for
a longer period of time she was doing the action
of looking in the other direction when I saw
her so she didn't see me those two little
actions happened while she was looking in
the other direction next we have the present
perfect in English we use the present perfect to
talk about experiences that happened in the past
with no specific time given to them to create this
tense you have the subject for example I and then
you have the auxiliary verb have this only con
Ates with he she it like our other verbs and
it becomes he she it has then you use What's
called the past participle of the verb the past
participle is usually formed by adding Ed to the
end of the verb so a verb like walk becomes
walked just like we looked at with the past
simple so in the present perfect this becomes I
have walked I have walked you can also contract
the subject and the auxiliary verb have and just
say I've walked again you can do that with all
the different subjects so you have walked becomes
you've walked she he it has walked so bear in mind
that that has changes there has walked so she's
walked he's walked it's walked we'd walked and
they'd walked walked a lot of irregular verbs
in English tend to have e n at the end of the
past participle so write becomes wrote in the past
simple but written in the past participle the same
with take took and taken or eat ate and eaten so
let's take a look at an example of when we use the
present perfect to talk about experiences take
a look at this example I have been to Japan do
you know when I went to Japan no we don't know
when I went to Japan all that matters here is
the experience it's the action that's all that's
important with the present perfect you can also
use the present perfect to talk about actions
which started in the past but they continue to
happen in the present or there is a connection
to the present for example I have lost my keys
this means that I lost my keys in the past and
they are still lost now because with the present
perfect there is a connection to the present if
you say I lost my keys with the present simple
it's not clear whether you found your keys
or not they could still be lost or maybe you
found them but with the present perfect when
you say I have lost my keys it implies that
the keys are still lost to make the negative form
of the present perfect just add not after have or
has so I have not lost my keys she has not lost
her keys let's now practice with some exercises
using the words in the brackets I'd like you to
fill the gaps for example we have he a horse he
has ridden a horse ridden is the past participle
of ride ride Rod ridden it's irregular now I'd
like you to try with these three sentences
here using the verb in the brackets I'd like
you to fill the Gap with the present perfect
pause the video if you feel you need more
time number one irregular verb eaten she has
not eaten all the bread or she hasn't eaten
all the bread number two I have met her before
or I've met her before number three he has not
finished his homework or he hasn't finished his
homework now let's move on to the present perfect
continuous we use the present perfect continuous
to talk about an action which started in the past
and it continues to happen up to the present
time this is formed in a very similar way to
the present perfect tense the only difference is
just adding a little bit extra so we start with
the subject and then have or has like we looked at
before I have or you have he she it has remember
the third person always changes then you add been
so I've been you've been he she it has been Etc
then you add the ing form of the verb remember
we looked at this with the continuous verbs like
I am doing here we can say I have been doing
I have been doing you have been doing he she
it has been doing and remember you only need
to conjugate the auxiliary verb have so I have
have you have he she it has has is the only
one you need to think about conjugating here
so here's an example a real example I have
been recording this video for over 3 hours
it's true so I've been recording this video for
over 3 hours so I'm using the present perfect
tense here because I'm talking about an action
which started in the past and it's continuing
to happen in the present you can also use it for
actions which have only recently stopped but there
is a connection somehow to the present I'll give
you some examples example number one I have been
living in Spain for 2 years the action started 2
years ago and it continues to happen now in the
present with the second example I'd like you to
imagine that you're looking outside your window
you you see that the sky is now clear but before
it was raining and it only stopped raining about 5
minutes ago you can say it has been raining now
this time we're talking about an action which
started in the past and only recently finished so
with the present perfect continuous you can use
it to talk about actions which started in the past
and only recently finished now let's practice with
some examples I'm going to read some sentences
to give you context but I'd like you to fill the
gaps pause if you need more time number one it is
snowing it started snowing 3 hours ago it for 3
hours it has been snowing for 3 hours
number two I am learning Spanish
I started learning Spanish
10 years ago I Spanish for 10
years I have been learning Spanish for 10 years
number three I started cleaning my office this
morning I finished just before I started
recording this video I my office all morning
I have been cleaning my office all morning now
let's look at the past perfect we use the past
perfect when we want to say that one action
happened before another action for example
Sarah had finished her homework before she
ate dinner she had finished her homework
first and then the second action was she ate
dinner here's another example I had eaten
before you arrived so I had eaten was the first
action then after that you arrived as you can
see the structure of the past perfect is really
similar to the present perfect remember with the
present perfect we used I have eaten but with the
past perfect you just put have into the past I had
eaten you had eaten she he it had eaten to sound
more natural you can contract and you can say I'd
done you'd done we'd done she'd done he'd done
Etc to make it negative you just add not after
had so I had cleaned becomes I had not cleaned or
to sound more natural you can squish those words
together and contract them and say I hadn't
cleaned now let's practice with some example
sentences as always you can pause to give yourself
extra time number one the performance before we
arrived the performance had started before we
arrived number two he the door before he went to
bed he had locked the door before he went to bed
number three I my suitcase before I left for the
airport I had packed my suitcase before I left
for the airport now let's move on to the next
tense I'm going to read an example sentence
pay attention yesterday I got home from work
extremely tired I had been working hard all
day this is the past perfect continuous you
use the past perfect continuous to emphasize
the duration of an action so if you think of
past perfect as just being one complete action
past perfect continuous is a longer action and
you're emphasizing that that action happened for
a long time and it happened before another action
happened so in our example sentence I had been
working all day I'm emphasizing the fact I had
been working for a long time all day and then I
got home so that second inter interaction that
second action is I got home here's another example
I had been painting the house before you arrived
I had been painting for a long time and then you
arrived so by using the past perfect continuous
I'm emphasizing the duration of the action to
create the structure for the past perfect Contin
it's very easy because nothing really changes you
don't need to conjugate anything you just start
with the subject then had been and then the ing
form of the verb for example I had been waiting
in a full sentence I had been waiting for half an
hour when the boss finally arrived so I had been
waiting for half an hour when the boss finally
arrived you can also use use the past perfect
continuous to talk about cause and effect for
example she was out of breath because she had
been running remember to sound more natural you
can contract the subject and had together so you
can say I'd been doing you'd been doing she'd
been doing he'd been doing it had been doing
we'd been doing and so on and to make it negative
you just add not in between had and been so I had
not been doing she had not been doing you had
not been doing or you can contract and you can
say hadn't so you contract had and not this time I
hadn't been doing you hadn't been doing she hadn't
been doing Etc now it's time to practice your
grammar with some more exercises remember pause
the video if you need more time number one we V
dear games all afternoon before our mom told us to
stop we had been playing or we'd
been playing notice as well that
when I say this very quickly I don't say
had been playing I say had been had been
playing so keep that in mind for your
pronunciation and it will also help
you with your listening skills number two
Phil was very tired when he got home he all
day he had been working all day or
he'd been working all day number
three the bus was extremely late
everyone for the bus for over an
hour everyone had been waiting for the bus
for over an hour number four Maria
failed her exam she very hard all
summer she hadn't been studying very hard
all summer now it's time to talk about the
future when you decide in the present moment to do
something in the future you use will conjugating
will is very easy because it doesn't change
so we say I will do so you add the verb after
you will do she will do he will do it will
do we will do they will do it's very easy
you don't need to change anything to sound
more natural you can contract the subject
and will I'll do you'll do she'll do Etc now
let's imagine this for a moment you walk into
a room and you see that the window is open
someone has left the window open so you say
oh I'll close the window I'll close the window
you use will in this case because you're setting
the intention now you can also use will when you
want to offer to do something for example that box
looks heavy I'll help you you can also use will
when you agree to do something for example I'll
give you this book the next time I see you and
finally you can use will to make promises for
example I'll send you the document later to make
will into the negative you just add not after it
so I will not send you the document if you want to
sound more natural then you just contract will and
not together and create won't so I won't send you
the document later you can also use won't when you
want to say that someone or something refuses to
do something so it sounds very very strong like
a strong refusal for example the pen won't work
or imagine you can't close the window you can say
the window won't close it's like it's refusing to
close let's say when we talk about plans for the
future we tend to use will when we make the plan
in that moment while we're speaking for example
imagine you ask me now Emma what are you going to
do this weekend and I have no plans I could say oo
I don't know I think I'll go to the park I think
I'll go because I just decided now I made the plan
now while I'm talking to you you can also use will
for General future intentions and plans so it's
not concrete it's just one day it will happen for
example one day I'll travel to India I don't know
when I don't have a plan I have no idea idea when
I will go but I will go one day here's another
example I'll see you another time do I know when
I will see you no but I will I intend to I plan to
one day in the future see you sometime so you see
that with will we don't really have any concrete
intentions it's not necessarily a 100% plan next
we're going to look at going to going to is for
future plans that you have already decided to do
so you intend to do these plans because you've
already decided to do them in the past for example
imagine that today is Monday and I decide I want
to buy a new phone I then make the plan to go to
the shop on Saturday to buy the new phone then
on Thursday you see me and you say Emma do you
have any plans for Saturday and I say yes I do
on Saturday I'm going to buy a new phone so I
use I'm going to buy because I made the plan
on Monday I set the intention the plan on Monday
the structure for going to is very simple just use
the subject for example I and then the present
form of to be so I am then the phrase going to
and then the verb so I am going to visit you are
going to visit she's going to visit we are going
to visit they are going to visit to sound more
natural you can contract the subject and to be
so I'm going to visit you're going to visit
she's going to visit he's going to visit Etc
here are some more examples I'm going to have a
coffee with my friend tomorrow you can also use
going to with future actions or predictions which
are very very obvious for example careful you're
going to walk into that wall you're going to get
sick if you only eat junk food now take a look at
these sentences and complete the gaps remember
you can pause the video if you need more time
number one his car stopped working last week so he
another one tomorrow so he is going to buy another
one tomorrow or he's going to buy another one
tomorrow number two I'm too tired so I football
tonight so I'm not going to play football
tonight or so I am not going to play
football tonight number three he bought a
new table but he doesn't know where he it yet
where he is going to put it yet or where he's
going to put it yet finally our last two tenses
that we're going to look at in this unit are
actually two tenses you have already learned
in this video before you learned how to use
the present continuous to talk about actions
that are happening right now for example
I am recording a video and you also learn
about how to use the present simple to talk about
things which are a routine or a general fact for
example I record videos every week take a look
at these examples using the present continuous
but we're talking about the future I'm not
working tomorrow I'm meeting my friend this
evening here we're using the present continuous
but why because these are concrete plans which
I've already decided to do in the future notice
how using the present continuous and going to
are very similar because you use both of them
to talk about actions you already decided to
do but the key difference here is that when
you know a plan or an action will 100% happen
in the future you use the present continuous the
present continuous sounds stronger it sounds like
100% the action is going to happen when you use
is going to it basically indicates to the other
person ah okay that person set the intention in
the past the plan has already been made but it
doesn't sound as concrete as present continuous
the present continuous sounds very concrete like
100% that plan is going to happen for example
I can't help you tomorrow I'm visiting my
grandparents it sounds like 100% I'm visiting my
grandparents no matter what that plan is not going
to change now let's look at the present simple
and using it for the future take a look at these
examples tomorrow my plane leaves at 700 a.m.
classes start next week at 9:00 a.m. so notice
with these that when we use the present simple to
talk about future actions it's for things which
follow a schedule so anything that follows a
timetable or a schedule of some kind you can
use the present simple for example Transportation
like train times flights Etc you can use it for
Cinema times for TV times things like that like
TV programs all of these follow a schedule or
you could use it for courses like the classes
start at 9:00 a.m. they follow a timetable I'd
like you to look at these sentences and decide
whether we should use the present simple or the
present continuous in the gaps remember you can
pause the video if you need more time number
one Susan is not visiting us tomorrow
or Susan isn't visiting us tomorrow
so this is a concrete plan she's
not visiting us tomorrow number
two the meeting starts at 10:00 tomorrow
morning the meeting starts because it's
a sh scheduled thing it's a scheduled event number
three I'm afraid I can't help you tomorrow I
am visiting my grandparents or I'm visiting
my grandparents we use the present continuous
because this is a concrete 100% plan number
four the train leaves at 6:00 p.m. the train
leaves because this this train follows a timetable
it follows a schedule so we use the present simple
and that is the end of today's English grammar
lesson on all the tenses from levels A1 to B2 to
talk about the past present and future correctly
in English if you want to practice today's
tenses and learn even more tenses to help you
speak English more accurately and confidently then
remember that you can get 25% off the interactive
book version of Cambridge's English grammar
in use just remember to use the code GIUSAVE25
GIUSAVE25 the link to get your copy of the
interactive ebook is in the description of
this video just remember to use your code to
get 25% off at the checkout remember to also
download the free pdf version of today's lesson
notes with all of today's exercises answers and
some pronunciation tips scatter throughout
so you can practice and improve your English
pronunciation as well the link to download your
free pdf is in the description of this video if
you have made it all the way to this part of
the video then thank you so much for watching
and comment down below with your favourite
animal my favourite animal I think I think my
favourite animals are dogs and my best friend
is here right now you can't see her but Freya
is here here she's been here the whole time I've
recorded this video I've been recording for about
5 hours poor thing I should go take her for a walk
right now remember to give this video a like if
you've enjoyed it and you've learned something
new and remember to subscribe if you'd like
more videos to help you improve your English
pronunciation thank you for watching bye-bye